Modelling the epidemiological and evolutionary dynamics of influenza outbreaks 
G Leen, M Baguelin, ?

Public Health England, 

Background

The rapid evolution of influenza viruses causes their epidemiological and evolutionary dynamics to 
occur on the same timescale, with complex, reciprocal interactions. Analysing genetic data sampled from
the viral population taken from a single infected host can quantify the level of genetic diversity present,
and enable the reconstruction of the underlying phylogenetic tree that generated the sample. Combining the data 
from multiple hosts can indicate the most likely transmission histories during an epidemic. However, 
investigating these two dynamical processes separately neglects their potentially important 
interplay. The within-host viral phylogeny, while shaped by host immunity and population genetic processes
for the duration of the infection, is additionally affected by transmission bottlenecks and 
the host's position in the transmission chain, while the transmission is dependent on the
genetic diversity that is generated within-host.     

Materials and methods

We developed a mathematical model of influenza viral evolution that unified dynamics on 
the epidemiological and evolutionary scales, given genetic data taken from within-host viral
populations for multiple infected hosts sampled from an epidemic, and information about sampling times. 

We assumed a metapopulation
structure where the infected hosts were modelled as distinct viral populations which 
interact through intra-host transmission events. Each of the within-host viral populations 
was modelled as a finite set of 'particles' which evolved according to stochastic SIR 
(susceptible, infected, recovered) dynamics, parameterized by a matrix of infection rates 
that determined the interaction between each pair of hosts, and within each host, and 
a recovery rate for each host. At the start of the epidemic, one particle was in the infected 
state, and the remaining particles were in the susceptible state, and the infected population 
size trajectory was simulated as the infection moved through the network of particles.

Given the metapopulation history, the underlying genealogy could be reconstructed, where
an infection event corresponded to a birth of a lineage, and recovery to a death. Mutations
were then simulated on the tree topology using a parameterized mutation model, and the sequences of 
the within host viral populations simulated at desired time points.

We used a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) framework to infer the tree topology, SIR rate parameters,
and mutation model parameters, given the genetic data.

We illustrated the performance of our model on an outbreak of equine influenza that 
occurred in spring 2003 in Newmarket, UK. Within-host viral populations were sampled from 
horses infected with equine influenza virus (EIV) through nasal swabs taken from 199 individual
horses. The HA region was cloned using PCR and sequenced using ABI 3730 x1 capillary sequencing,
resulting in 2222 sequences covering 90% of the infected yards. 

Results



Conclusions

